At Psalm 133:1, we read:
“Look! How good
and how pleasant it is
for brothers to dwell together in unity!”
This scripture was vividly seen when visiting
the Scandinavia and Finland branches.
I had the privilege of serving
these two branches
as a headquarters representative
during the month of May 2018
along with my wife, Susan.
We knew that these branches
had undergone major changes
in their territory assignments
in recent years.
Both were merged with other branches
that have different languages and cultures.
I was very anxious to see firsthand
how the brothers were handling
these challenges.
The former branches in Denmark,
Iceland,
Norway,
and Sweden
were merged to form the Scandinavia branch.
The branch facilities are located in Holbæk,
which is about an hour outside of Copenhagen.
It is beautifully situated
in a suburban community,
and the grounds of the branch
form a lovely garden.
During our visit, the weather
was exceptionally fine,
which is not typical for Scandinavia.
So all took advantage
of the sunshine and warm weather.
But the warmth of the sunshine
could not outdo
the love shown
by our brothers at the branch.
The Bethel family totals
92 full-time members.
Forty-seven are Danish-speaking,
17 speak Norwegian,
and 28 speak Swedish.
I wondered how they carried out their work
and especially their spiritual programs.
As it turns out, they use a mixture
of all three languages.
For instance, at morning worship,
the chairman might speak in Danish,
the opening prayer might be in Norwegian,
and the commentors
might give their comments in Swedish.
And every week,
there are prerecorded comments
from one of the Remote Translation Offices,
such as Greenland and the Faroe Islands.
In addition,
the branch alternates conducting
the Monday night Watchtower  Study
between Danish, Norwegian, or Swedish,
and the brothers are free to comment
in their mother tongue.
Though all these languages
are different from each other,
there are similarities
and, so for the most part,
they all can understand each other.
But to help the brothers communicate
with each other,
the brothers came up with a language manual
that contains lists of common words
and their meanings in each language.
In addition, the manual contains
“Five commandments” such as:
“Do not speak fast,”
“Use good articulation,”
and “Smile while you speak.”
This greatly helps
in smoothing over any miscommunications.
For instance, the Danish word for “kind”
is the Norwegian word for “peculiar.”
So by following these commandments,
a Norwegian brother would not feel bad
if his Danish brother were to tell him,
“You are a peculiar person.”
The translation work for these languages
takes place at Remote Translation Offices,
or RTOs.
Each language RTO is located
in their respective countries.
The RTOs function
much like a Bethel facility.
For the most part, meals are provided,
but each cares for their own laundry
and transportation.
We were grateful for the opportunity
to visit the RTO in Malmo, Sweden,
which is a short car ride from Denmark.
At the Swedish RTO, the workers live
at a nearby apartment complex.
It’s a busy place,
since they not only translate into Swedish
but also translate into Swedish Sign Language
and produce audio recordings.
The facilities are well used
and a bit cramped for space.
Nevertheless, there is
a joyful spirit at the RTO,
and the brothers there
enjoy working with one another.
The use of technology plays a major role
in caring for the work at Bethel
as well as in communicating
throughout the branch territory.
This was well-illustrated
when giving a special talk
to all congregations in Scandinavia.
The talk was streamed
to congregations as far away
as the north of Norway,
to the south and the Faroe Islands,
as well as to Greenland.
All throughout Scandinavia,
the brothers came together
to hear and see the talk
“Sing Out Joyfully to Jehovah.”
Likewise in Finland,
when visiting that country,
I gave the same talk.
It too was streamed to Kingdom Halls
all throughout their territory,
including the former branch territories
of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
These three branches had been merged
with Finland in recent times.
The former branch facilities
in Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania
are being well used as RTOs
and to hold classes
for the School for Kingdom Evangelizers
and the School for Circuit Overseers
and Their Wives.
Both branch facilities underwent
some renovations to convert
their former printeries into office space
and a comfortable family lounge.
This space also provides a place
for historical museums
where tours can visit
and learn about the history
of the Kingdom work in these lands.
While visiting these branches,
I wondered how those who had served
for a number of years
on their respective Branch Committees
felt about the mergers.
The comments I received
showed a tremendous depth
of spirituality and faith in Jehovah
and the direction he provides
through his organization.
Consider Brother Lars-Erik Eriksson.
He served on the Branch Committee
in Sweden for 14 years.
How did he feel when the Governing Body
informed the branch about the merger?
In one way, it came as a surprise for us.
But in another way, it was not
—because the merging of branches
had already started
in other parts of the world.
And I remember that we brothers
on the former Swedish Branch Committee joked
and said that if something
will take place in Scandinavia,
the new branch office
will be located in Sweden.
And we also thought
that only Norway and Sweden
should be merged
—but not so.
One brother
from the former Norwegian Branch Committee
called me,
and he couldn’t understand
why the new branch
should be located in Denmark.
He said that you already have
the needed space in Sweden
—rooms and other things—
and Denmark is small in comparison.
I had to admit, I was surprised too.
We have learned an important lesson
that ‘Jehovah’s ways are not our ways,
and his ways are higher than our ways.’
Everything turned out very well.
Right from the beginning,
there has been
a wonderful cooperation in the family.
And we work together in peace and unity.
A few times, especially in the beginning,
we reminded each other
that it is not a Danish branch,
it is not a Norwegian branch
or a Swedish branch,
it is a Scandinavian branch office.
In a similar vein,
consider what Brother Jouni Palmu,
a member of the Finland Branch Committee,
noted about their merger:
Combining different countries,
cultures, and languages
under one branch office
seemed impossible five years ago
when this project started.
However, we were confident
that if the Governing Body
had started such a project,
our task was to figure out
how to make it work well.
We started working,
and we can see that Jehovah
has blessed this project.
We can now see how Jehovah’s people
are a united group
and how we are like a big family
in a territory that covers several countries.
It has also made us confident of the fact
that if we are already a united, fine people,
when the new world comes,
we are prepared to live there
and receive more blessings.
This project has clearly shown us
that God’s Kingdom rules
and that the Governing Body
is under Christ’s direction.
During my visit, it was common
to hear comments from Bethelites
and those working hard in the field
that the mergers were the best thing
that could have happened.
It has been
a spiritually enriching experience for all.
It has strengthened their faith in Jehovah
and has increased their love
for their brothers.
Along this line,
consider what Brother Teemu Konsti,
a member
of the Finland Branch Committee, said:
Well, a great spiritual blessing
has been that this merger
has brought us closer as a brotherhood.
Peter once asked Jesus
what the reward would be
for following Jesus Christ,
and Jesus answered: “everlasting life.”
But in this period of time,
the reward is ‘brothers and sisters
and fathers and mothers,’
spiritually speaking.
So after this merger,
we have gained so many brothers and sisters
and fathers and mothers.
So we have been richly rewarded.
Our trip to these branches
was truly faith-strengthening.
It was a joy to see
that despite the challenges
that from a human standpoint
are insurmountable,
with Jehovah’s help
our brothers joyfully overcame them
and are united in doing God’s will.
Because of such unity,
Jehovah has opened the door
for large numbers of immigrants and refugees
that speak a variety of languages.
Therefore, the brotherhood
in both Scandinavia and Finland
has become quite diverse
in languages as well as cultures.
Yes, it was truly a delight
to see our brothers
“dwelling together in unity.”
No matter where we went,
all the brothers
wanted you to be sure
of their warm love and brotherly affection.